---
student_name: Carla Forster
topic: Commong Digital Public Infrastructures - Why openCode.de should be opened to the contributions of citizens
---

# Commong Digital Public Infrastructures - Why openCode.de should be opened to the contributions of citizens

OpenCode is hosted by the German ZenDiS (Center for Digital Sovereignty), which was initiated 2022 by the Ministry for the Interior on the basis of its establishment in Germany’s Digital Strategy. OpenCode was initiated by the German federal IT planning council and is a central project in Germany’s aim for digital sovereignty. It allows public service entities to share code online alongside collaborating on these projects and exchanging knowledge in its forum. ZenDiS took on the openCode project in January 2024 and hosts it alongside openDesk, their open source alternative to Microsoft office. OpenCode therefore provides an option for collaborating on code alternative to the popular proprietary platform GitHub, owned by US-based Microsoft, which is particularly important considering current geopolitical tensions between Europe and the US. 
OpenCode is Digital Public Infrastructure (DPI) – meaning the infrastructure necessary for a modern digital society, usually provided by states, for the public good. This brief proposes to make the first step to develop openCode towards a digital common – an open, shared digital resource governed by a community – through allowing citizen contributions on the public service code projects on it. This brief argues, in this order, why this move is normatively important, that it would support German public service innovation at relatively little direct state cost, that it would improve openCode’s long term sustainability, and that it would support the ZenDiS’ existing goals. 

## How can integrating citizen contributions make openCode better?
(why normatively important)
Opening openCode would also be a positive development normatively. “Commoning” it presents a unique opportunity to democratise Germany’s public structures, a shift very much in line with the country’s and the EU’s overall policy goals on digital matters and in terms of citizen participation. INSERT HERE FROM POLICY STRATEGY DOCUMENTS
Germany  is very active in these domains internationally, SOVEREIGNTY FUND? CHECK, MAJOR THING 2, and domestically through providing broad funding for digital commons, especially those at a lower level of the technology stack.
With key officials emphasising that it is crucial that all members of the public service can participate for digital transformation to be successful – citizens, the users and those who depend on it, should have a say too.

(public service innovation)
 It would be a milestone in German public service innovation and help the country to improve its notoriously bureaucratic public administration. Allowing those using the system to make improvements to it is a step closer to a state and public administration that works better for everyone. Enabling the citizens who use these services to contribute to their structure has the potential to improve this greatly at relatively little direct effort and cost for the state itself.

(Improve long term sustainability)
Additionally, opening up the platform and moving it towards a digital common funded by the public is an opportunity to combine the best of both worlds to achieve an open, democratically governed platform that has stable funding – the latter being a problem independent commons frequently grapple with. It would also make openCode more resilient to a shift in political priorities, whose impact on funding availability would have significant impacts currently – if all maintainers and users of a project rely on state funding rather than the intrinsic motivation and community-driven development true digital commons like Linux rely on, they are very vulnerable to this. Integrating the platform deeper in Germany’s open source culture is a way to allow the establishment of long-term structures keep it active even if political priorities shift. Germany in particular has a big open source community actively supported by the state.

(Fit with Zendis goals)
 With the new Digital Ministry and the establishment of ZenDiS, Germany has intensified efforts on digitalisation in general and the implementation of open source principles in the public service in particular. ZenDiS was founded in part with the idea to make it the German public services’s Open Source Programme Office (OSPO)1 – the central unit in an organisation responsible for Open Source. After ZenDiS took on OpenCode in 2024, the initial focus laid on making the platform more user friendly, which the team achieved through efforts in improving the interface and its community management to draw in technical experts within the public service. Its current goal is to develop openCode from a code archive to a platform for actively joint development of public service software solutions, with a bigger mission to effect a cultural change2 towards open source principles like collective efforts and an open exchange culture in the public service. Allowing citizens this access, too, is a step towards promoting this culture in- and outside the public service, drawing increased attention to the initiative on both sides (especially if appropriately accompanied by a public campaign. 


## Practical limitations and pathways to implementation
Realistically, opening openCode is a long-term rather than a short-term goal. Technically, the platform is accessible to citizens now, but they need to receive a personal invitation from a member of the public service3, making the mechanism prone to favouritism and not truly common. This is understandable from a security point of view, but the restriction should be lifted in the future to improve the democratic nature of openCode and allow a bigger spectrum of citizens access.
In order to make this change practically feasible, a structured pilot programme in selected communities is recommended to test the viability of this change and practical aspects. While some individuals have high technical skills, the average skill level is certainly insufficient to contribute to coding solutions, with only 49% of Germans having basic digital competences. An ambitious rollout of this could include a community programme where engaged citizens with less or more technical skills work together at the local level to propose solutions to their grievances with digital public services. 
Naturally, some projects are of a more sensitive nature and security considerations must be considered. Again, openCode can take inspiration from other big open source projects like the Linux foundation or Wikipedia, where certain more experienced community members need to approve others’ contributions before they are integrated into the project.
 
 
